vision doc: what do people love about Rust? (#1767)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: content/what-do-people-love-about-rust.md

[^gleam]: In 2025, 72% of Rust users said they wanted to keep using it. In the past, Rust had a *way* higher score than any other language, but this year, [Gleam came awfully close](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2025/technology/#admired-and-desired), with 70%! Good for them! Gleam looks awesome--and hey, good choice on the `fn` keyword. ;)

When we sat down to crunch the vision doc data, one of the things we really wanted to explain was: *What is it that inspires that strong loyalty to Rust?*[^messitup] Based on the interviews, the answer is at once simple and complicated. The short version is that **Rust empowers them to write reliable and efficient software**. If that sounds familiar, it should: [it's the slogan that we have right there on our web page](https://www.rust-lang.org). The more interesting question is **how** that empowerment comes about, and what that it implies for how we evolve Rust.

[^messitup]: And, uh, how can we be sure not to mess it up?

## What do people appreciate about Rust?

> The first thing we noticed is that, throughout every conversation, no matter whether soneone is writing their first Rust program or has been writing it for years, no matter whether they're building massive data clusters or embedded devices or just messing around, there are a consistent set of things that they say they like about Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing we noticed is that, throughout every conversation, no matter whether someone is writing their first Rust program or has been using it for years, no matter whether they're building massive data clusters or embedded devices or just messing around, there are a consistent set of things that they say they like about Rust.
```

The first is **reliability**. People love that "if it compiles, it works" feeling:

> "What I really love about Rust is that if it compiles it usually runs. That is fantastic, and that is something that I'm not used to in Java." -- Senior software engineer working in automotive embedded systems
>
> "Rust is one of those languages that has just got your back. You will have a lot more sleep and you actually have to be less clever." -- Rust consultant and open source framework developer

> Another, of course, is **efficiency**, especially in data-center contexts:

Reviewer 2: Maybe a reword to help it flow into the next couple of sections?
```suggestion
Another, of course, is **efficiency**, from data-centers to safety-critical embedded devices:
```

Author: I reworded this.

>
> "Cargo is an amazing package manager. It is probably the best one I've ever worked with. I don't think I ever run into issues with cargo. It just works." -- Software engineer with production Rust experience
>
> "The Rust compiler is fantastic at kind of the errors it gives you. It's tremendously helpful in the type of errors it produces for it. But not just errors, but the fact it also catches the errors that other languages may not catch." -- Distinguished engineer working on cloud infrastructure services

## The result: Rust as a gateway into new domains

When all these pieces come together, something interesting happens: Rust becomes a **gateway** into domains that would otherwise be inaccessible. We heard story after story of people whose careers changed because Rust gave them confidence to tackle things they couldn't before:

> "I was civil engineering and I studied front-end development on my own, self taught. I had no computer background. I got interested in Rust and distributed systems and designs and systems around it. I changed my major, I studied CS and Rust at the same time." -- Software engineer transitioning to cryptography research
>

> > "I've been working with arbitrary subsidiaries of Bosch for the last 25 years. Always doing software development mostly in the Java space... two years ago I started peeking into the automotive sector. In that context it was a natural consequence to either start working with C++ (which I did not want to do) or take the opportunity to dive into the newly established Rust ecosystem." -- Senior software engineer working in automotive embedded systems

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> "I've been working with arbitrary subsidiaries of [a multinational engineering and technology company] for the last 25 years. Always doing software development mostly in the Java space... two years ago I started peeking into the automotive sector. In that context it was a natural consequence to either start working with C++ (which I did not want to do) or take the opportunity to dive into the newly established Rust ecosystem." -- Senior software engineer working in automotive embedded systems
```

[^sleep]: ...for experienced devs operating on less sleep, who do tend to act a lot like noobs.

> "Instead of using just a raw bit field, somebody encoded it into the type system. So when you'd have a function like 'open door', you can't pass an 'open door' if the door's already open. The type system will just kick that out and reject it." -- Software engineer working on automotive digital cockpit systems
>
> "You can create contracts. For example, when you are allowed to use locks in which order." -- Senior embedded systems engineer working on automotive middleware development

The problem though is that sometimes the work to encode those invariants in types can create something that feels more complex than the problem itself:

> "When you got Rust that's both async and generic and has lifetimes, then those types become so complicated that you basically have to be some sort of Rust god in order to even understand this code or be able to do it." -- Software engineer with production Rust experience
>
> "Instead of spaghetti code, you have spaghetti typing" -- Platform architect at automotive semiconductor company
>

> > I find it more opaque, harder to get my head around it. The types describe not just the interface of the thing but also the lifetime and how you are accessing it, whether it's on the stack or the heap, there's a lot of stuff packed into them." -- Software engineer working on data science platforms

Reviewer 2: Missing opening `"`
```suggestion
> "I find it more opaque, harder to get my head around it. The types describe not just the interface of the thing but also the lifetime and how you are accessing it, whether it's on the stack or the heap, there's a lot of stuff packed into them." -- Software engineer working on data science platforms
```

> "I feel like there's a ramp in learning and then there's a jump and then there's async over here. And so the goal is to get enough excitement about Rust to where you can jump the chasm of sadness and land on the async Rust side." -- Software engineer working on automotive digital cockpit systems
>
> "My general impression is actually pretty negative. It feels unbaked... there is a lot of arcane knowledge that you need in order to use it effectively, like Pin---like I could not tell you how Pin works, right?" -- Research software engineer with Rust expertise

For Rust to provide that "trusted tool that will help you tackle new domains" experience, people need to be leverage their expectations and knowledge of Rust in that new domain. With async, not only are there missing language features (e.g., `async fn` in traits only became available last year, and still have gaps), but the supportive tooling and ecosystem that users count on to "bridge the gap" elsewhere works less well:

> "I was in favor of not using async, because the error messages were so hard to deal with." -- Desktop application developer
>

> > "The fact that there are still plenty of situations where you go *that library looks useful, I want to use that library* and then that immediately locks you into one of Tokyo or one of the other runtimes, and you're like *that's a bit disappointing because I was trying to write a library as well and now now I'm locked into a runtime*." -- Safety systems engineer working on functional safety for Linux

Reviewer 2: Probably transcription typo
```suggestion
> "The fact that there are still plenty of situations where you go *that library looks useful, I want to use that library* and then that immediately locks you into one of tokio-rs or one of the other runtimes, and you're like *that's a bit disappointing because I was trying to write a library as well and now now I'm locked into a runtime*." -- Safety systems engineer working on functional safety for Linux
```
